First of all, Mr. Crane, would you tell us
something about your early life, including the
names of your parents, the dates of their birth and
death, perhaps, where they were born, where you
were born, and the schools you attended before you
entered Texas A&M? All right. My father was born on
March the 23rd, 1862, in Hunt County. My mother was
born on January the 12th, 1873, also in Hunt
County. They didn't know each other when they were
young, but they were born in the same vicinity. I
was born in Lone Oak, or near Lone Oak, in Hunt
County in March 11th, 1908. Your father's name
was? Joel Arthur, Jr. He was a junior. My mother was
Hattie Dyle. D-I-A-L. D-I-A-L.
And I was, well, as I've already said, when I was
born. And moved to Cumbee, which is a small town in
Hopkins County, just across the line, when I was
about 13 years old. But I was raised for 13 years on a
farm. and attended public schools in Cumbie and a
rural one-teacher school in Lonella for the
first,
let's see, about seventh or eighth grade, I guess.
Eighth, ninth, tenth. Yeah, about sixth grade, a
rural one-teacher school. Larry Bird's
always... bragging about he had a four-teacher
school. I said, man, you're the big shot. Because I
had one teacher, and she taught everybody
everything that was taught. And I said, you were an
aristocrat because I just had one teacher. But
then when we moved to Cumbie, of course, that was a
10th grade high school. It only went to the 10th
grade. So I had to go to Sulphur Springs, the 11th
grade, in order to get enough credits to attend A&M
College, because Cumbie was not affiliated and
didn't go far enough in the grades to allow me to
attend A&M. I could have gone and taken them exams,
but I decided I'd go one more year of high school and
went to Suffer Springs, which is the county seat of
Hopkins County. So at this point, if you completed
a non-affiliated school, you'd have to have an
exam to enter A&M. Right. I could have come to A&M
and taken an exam, an entrance exam, had I passed,
they'd have said, okay. But I preferred to go to
school until I had my credits, because really I
was, in 1925, I was only 17 years old, and frankly, I
don't think that I was necessarily ready to go to
college. I preferred to go another year to high
school, in other words, so I went to Sulphur
Springs. What factors were involved in your
choice of Texas A&M? Banker in Cumbie, where I
lived from 1921 until I went off to college in 26. A
banker, two of the bankers, one of them was a vice
president, one of them was a cashier of the bank,
both of them had been to A&M. And, of course, they
recommended it highly. And then the last year in
high school in Sulphur Springs, one of my
classmates had a brother who was in A&M that year.
And he was very high on recommending. He was in the
band, but he highly recommended A&M as a place to go
to school. and I wanted to take some kind of
engineering. I really wasn't sure what kind,
except I didn't want to pick cotton or chop cotton,
so I wanted to be an engineer. I thought that
sounded a lot easier than picking cotton, because
I'd had my time at picking cotton, and I didn't
really care for it. And those things together,
knowing the people and wanting an engineering
degree, and A&M did have a good reputation for
engineering, anything agricultural or
engineering. And, of course, still does for that
matter. And that's what made the decision. And I
understood that it wasn't an expensive college,
that you could go reasonably cheap. And I had to do
that because I had to work all the time I was in
college. And there seemed to be more
opportunities from what I could find out talking
to the fellows who had been down there. What
procedures did you have to go through to enter the
school? I had no problem after I finished Sulphur
Spring High School. My credits were sent to A&M,
and there was no problem at all. It was just a matter
of registering. Did the school notify you that you
were acceptable? No. As I recall, I went down
there. I went to school, period, and got down there
early. and went through the process of
registering and submitting my paper. Now, I could
have written them. I'm not sure about that,
Charles, because that's been there to a goal. But
it seems to me that I went to A&M with the idea, well,
you can get in. You've got the credits, because the
credits had already been sent. And I just went down
there and went through the process of
registration. I didn't pre-register or apply for
admittance. Back in 1926, they were pretty glad to
get anybody from anywhere. They even take me
without questioning too much. What were your
first reactions to the school and to the
community, what there was of it? Well, my first
reaction to A&M College, Charles, was that had
there been another train, I'd have gone back home.
That was my first reaction. Because I got on the
train in Dallas, and there were two or three
seniors in Company E Infantry on the train going
down at the same time the freshmen were going, a
week ahead of time, you know. And I got, I was, I
guess you'd call it harassed or heckled or
whatever. They didn't mistreat us, but they saw
that we didn't get any sleep on the train going
down. They got down there. Of course, we had to
carry some of the luggage up to the YMCA, which was
all right. I was a strong back and a weak mind, and I
didn't mind that. But I walked up to the YMCA
fountain out in front, the old YMCA, and drank some
of that black water. It used to be just full of
sulfur. It looked like you'd spilled a bottle of
ink in it as it came out. And took a drink of that, and
I stood up, and I said, God, if I can find a train, I'm
going home. Was this a water fountain? It's a water
fountain. That was the type of water they had there
because it was highly concentrated with... Uh...
Oh, hydro... No, not hydrocarbon. Uh... some type
of a of a mineral that actually it tasted and
smelled and looked like it came out of somebody's
sewage tank it is awful stuff i ever saw i'd been
raised on uh rainwater and brother that was so
different and no food and i would have gone home
right then we got there about six o'clock in the
morning just good daylight And I got a drink of that
water, and I'm not joking, if it had been a train
back to Dallas, I'd have gone back home right then.
Because that was just too much. Well,
fortunately, there wasn't a train until, I think,
the next day. Well, by then, I'd gotten so busy, I'd
forgot about the water. And really, the first
drink was the worst. From there on, it was
drinkable, but it still wasn't good water. But I
got used to it and got carried away with thick malt
and milks at old Jeff Casey and Bill Sparks'
drugstore there in the YMCA. And for a quarter,
which I didn't have very many of, you could get a big
old glass of thick malt. And, brother, you talk
about somebody that ate his share of those things
until my quarters ran out. So I really didn't have
to drink too much of the water. Was there anybody to
meet, to train, to try to recruit you for a military
company? No, no, they didn't care what happened to
you. They figured you'd fall into a slot
somewhere. And when I registered, I think they
said, what do you want to be in? And it seems to me, as
I recall, now some of this is a little fuzzy on the
edges, but Seems to be, I said, well, I don't know
anything to do except walk. I never rode a horse
enough to get in the cavalry, and I don't know
anything about guns in the artillery. And those
were the three main, infantry, artillery, signal
corps, and cavalry, I believe, were the main one.
And I said, I guess you better make a foot soldier
out of me. And that's how come I, well, do you have
any preference on the company? No, I don't care
what company or where. I didn't know anybody
anywhere. I didn't know a soul down there except
the boy. that from Sulphur Springs, a classmate
that had a brother in A&M the year we finished high
school. Now, of course, he was going down there.
And he had decided he wanted to be in artillery. And
he had just about as much reason for being in
artillery as I did in infantry. But we didn't get
together on that because he was going another
direction. And so I ended up in Company D infantry,
I believe it was. Si Stratton was captain of the
company and president of the senior class that
year, I believe. Si Stratton. What dormitory was
that? In Milner. In Milner. It was one of the fairly
new ones. Yeah, it was fairly new. It was over by the
mess hall. The mess hall, you know, was brand new in
26, and it was close to the mess hall, and I was
delighted with the company I had. It was across
from the post office, so it used to be over near
Gatheride, the old band hall. And the
post office was right next door to it, just right
across the street from Milner. And it seemed to me a
very good place to be. Were you in the same
dormitory the whole time you were there? No, I was
in that dormitory, though, for my freshman,
sophomore, and part of my junior year. I got out of
the Corps at the end of my sophomore year because at
that time you made a choice as to whether you were
going to stay in ROTC or not. And I was working every
spare minute I had and the uniform cost a little
more than my fatigues that I could wear working and
single uniform that I wore in the Corps. So going
into the junior year, I decided I'd get out of the
Corps because The military took some of your time,
and as I say, the clothes were a little more
expensive. So after two years, yeah, two years, I
got out of the military, moved over into
non-military hall, which was civilian
non-military, which you could do at the end of two
years. For how long had that been the custom, or do
you know? You mean getting out of the military?
Yeah. Well, it was optional, as I recall, Charles,
back when I went to school. All you had to take was
two years. If you took the other two years, or
junior and senior years, that's when you had some
military allowance for your clothes. In other
words, I could have gotten some help with my
uniforms and that type of thing, but I figured that
I'd be better off working as much as I did not to be in
the Corps. And as I recall, it's been two-year
optional, was, and had been for a good while. Now,
how long, I don't know. Quite possibly shortly
after the war. Well, that's what I kind of think.
After the war, they said, okay, two years is all you
have to take. And then your junior and senior years
was entirely optional. Well, I elected to go
non-military for two years, and then my fifth
year, I took five years to graduate, actually. My
fifth year, they went back to uniforms for
non-military students. So in my fifth year, I was,
I don't know, I don't remember the title. I think I
was dorm master or dormitory supervisor in my
senior year, but I had to wear a uniform. We had an
NM, non-military insignia, on our collars. It's
like... Calvary or infantry had their type of
insignia. So it was the same uniform as the...
Right, except for the emblems, and we did not wear
boots. And being in charge of the dorm, I got some
living allowance for that. So as I say, it took me
five years to graduate. I don't guess I had to take
five years, but I wasn't in a big hurry, and I was
working ever... every opportunity. I did
everything from milk Dr. Marsh's cow to wait on
tables in the mess hall and hotel and over at the ag
land. And really, I worked so much that I really
couldn't take as many hours as I probably could
have, you know, if I'd have been determined to get
out in four years. Could you have any idea or make an
estimate of the percentage of students who were
not in the military the last two years?
There wasn't a great deal, wasn't a great number.
As I recall, we had two dormitories, old, well,
I swear, two old wooden halls. Alpha and Beta. Two
old wooden buildings. Alpha and Beta were
non-military and now I don't know how many people
those held. And there were a few that didn't stay on
the campus that were non-military. Were they
local? Yeah, local boys and lived close to Bryan or
in and around Bryan and they weren't in the
military.
George, I'd be scared to guess at how many out of
the, let's see, we had in 1927, I believe we had
2,000 students. I would say 10% of them. That's a
wild guess, but... I was going to say, if there were
only two dollars, probably not more than a couple
hundred. That's right. I'd say 10% were
non-military for various reasons. Not all of them
my reasons. Some of them were partially crippled.
They actually couldn't have been in it. They
weren't in the civilian... I mean, they weren't in
the military any time. I mean, they registered as a
non-military. The only way you could register and
not take two years of... military, as I recall, you
had to be physically handicapped in some way that
tended to make it hard for you to drill or, you know,
march and so forth. And there were, I guess,
counting everybody, those that didn't chose to
take the last two years and those that were
physically disabled, I'd say between 10 and 15
percent. I'd hate to try to get it any closer than
that. You mentioned some of the jobs which you had
when you were on campus, like working in the mess
hall and waiting tables. Was this to Aggieland?
Yeah. Do you remember how much you earned there per
hour? No, I don't. Mostly, I got food and a place to
stay. You didn't get any money, really, for
working. You got subsistence. And the mess hall
job... I had a job in a mess hall. Then after I lost
that job, overslept one morning and got fired, so I
went over to Agland Inn and got a job. And it was a
little better pay because you actually got some
pay plus your food. But Charles, to try to tell you
what it was, compared to today's incomes and
prices, it wasn't much, I guarantee. But it was an
awful lot to me, and it was an awful lot to any of
those kids that were working. Today the student's
labor gets $1.90 an hour. That's right. And, Lord,
if I made $1.90 all day, I'd have felt like I was
rich. You could have bought a whole bunch of them.
Oh, good Lord. I picked up paper and poked...
scraps of paper with a nail for many, many hours of
days for 20 cents and 25 cents an hour. And I mean, we
worked at it. We didn't just stand around and talk.
We, as they say about the old wagon train, wheel
out, or what's that expression they say? Anyway,
you know, when they start them out on the road. And
we had somebody watching us. But it was an awful lot
then. because it's the only way I could go to
school. Dad provided a little bit of money, but he
didn't have an awful lot of money, and my mother
didn't have a lot of money. They separated the year
I went off to high school. In the late 20s, was this
the time period when they had the project houses,
the beginnings of the project houses, or did that
come after you left? That came after. You know,
when the Depression really hit in 29 and 30 and 31 is
when they started the project houses. They did not
have any while I was there, or I'd have probably
been in one because they say that was a pretty good,
easy way to... go to school. It was much easier
financially.
I think they started the first of those either in 31
or 32. I'm not sure. Could
you as a non-military student wait tables in the
mess hall? Oh, yeah. You were hired there. by the
sergeant in charge of the waiters, and he didn't
care whether you were in the military or a general
or a corporal or a non-military. As long as he had
enough people to do the job. That's right. Could
you describe a typical day Now, I imagine you could
describe two typical days because the two years
you were in the military would have one kind of
schedule, and the two years you were in the years
you were not military, you had a little different
rules, I believe. The two years I was in the
military was part of that time in my sophomore
years when I milked
Dr. Marsh's cow every morning. Well, that was
supposed to be at 5 o'clock in the morning. And then
I had, when I got through that, I came back and made
Reveille. And after Reveille, I went and waited
tables. And then, of course, go to class and come
back and wait tables at noon and then in the
afternoon. And then once a week, we had to drill
half a day. But my days were pretty long when I was
milking that old cow, but I finally had to give that
up. Dr. Marsh, he was an awful nice man. He was a
school doctor. And he was very polite about it, but
he said, Oscar, he says, I think you're working too
much. I think you better quit this job. Well, the
truth of the matter, the old cow was drying up
because I'd milk her at 5 o'clock one morning. The
next morning I'd oversleep, and it'd be between 7
and 8 before I'd get down there to milk her. And as a
result, you cannot milk a cow. You've got to milk
regular. In other words, I don't know how much you
know about cows, but they have to be milked pretty
regular or they'll dry up. So he very politely
eased me out of my milking job, which I was grateful
for because I don't think I got but $5 a month to milk
her every morning and evening, every day of the
month. Well, that's an awful lot of milking for $5,
but $5 was $5. But he very politely eased me out of
that job because she was going dry, and he didn't
want to just fire me because he was too
soft-hearted for that. So he just said, I think
you're working too hard. It's not good for you. You
quit. And I did. And about that time is when I lost my
job as waiter in the mess hall and then got my job
over at the Agland Inn. So that was in your
sophomore year. Yeah. And then during my junior
year, I worked at the Agland Inn. Junior and senior
year, yeah. That was all the way through the last
few years. Yeah, that's right. Well, what about
the fifth year, or is that what you call your senior
year? Well, that was what I call my senior year, and
that's the year that I was dorm... Well, I think
they called us dorm mothers or something, and I got
paid for being in charge of the dormitory, and I
didn't have to work at the mess hall. That would
have been in either alpha or beta. No, no. We had a
new one, the bachelor's quarters, a dormitory
that's been gone for many, many years, bachelor's
quarters. It was a place that... bachelor
professors lived that taught at the college
called it bachelor's quarters and they finally
left that open for non-military students my fifth
year and that's where I stayed and that was the dorm
that I was in charge of and we had I don't remember
how many non-military students I'd say Well,
still had nearly the 10%, I would guess. Probably a
little less than there was the two years I lived in
Alpha or Beta. Alpha's where I lived, in Alpha.
During the two years that you were in the military,
right after Reveille, did you have exercises
before you went to breakfast? We had exercises at
Reveille. Yeah, that's what you did at Reveille.
You'd march a little, and you'd go through
calisthenics. And then go back to your room. Go
back to your room, and then we'd form in line again a
little bit later and march to breakfast. You
marched to all meals, and in the morning at
Reveille, we'd have our calisthenics and
marching exercises and go back to the dorm and and
for just a very few minutes and then would fall out
again to march into the mess hall for breakfast.
And then did you have an inspection every day or
this would be room inspection, I guess? As I
recall, we had room inspection almost every day,
sometime during the day. I don't recall that it was
always in the morning. But then on our drill day, we
had a very rigid inspection. As I recall, once a
week, we had room inspection that was pretty
thorough. That was, I believe, our drill day. Then
every day during the week, a captain or his
lieutenant or somebody would come around and make
just a kind of a cursory examination, just say how
y'all boys doing. And who inspected you then on
drill day? Same ones. And most of the time, there
would be an Army regular lieutenant or a captain
come with whoever inspected on drill day. In other
words, a lot of times. Now, I don't recall that the
Army personnel, you know, they had regular Army
personnel stationed there that helped with the
military or helped direct the military. And I
don't recall that there was always an Army officer
on the drill day, but pretty regular he would show
up. Because I remember one old Captain Ware, the
old so-and-so, I didn't have any money to get a
haircut, and he gave me 50 cents to get my haircut.
He made me mad. I should have thanked him, but it
hurt my feelings. He
said, Fish, that was when I was a freshman. He said,
Fish Crane, you get you a haircut. Here's 50 cents.
Captain Ware. Where'd you get a haircut? They had a
barbershop over in Hawaii where Casey and Sparks'
drugstore was. This was kind of a private
concession then? Yeah, they were
concessionaires in the YMCA. And then I believe
when I first started to school, there was a
drugstore down at what we called the North Gate. I
think that drugstore was there. I'm not too—
That'd be in the area there behind Speezer Hall,
then. Yeah, on down—well, over there where that
farm road goes east and west down there. Agilent
Pharmacy, I believe, was there for many, many
years. The reason I'm pretty sure that was because
Methodist Church was down there in that same area,
and that's where I went to church usually, Sunday
school. Thank you. say life was like in, say, both
the military dorm and in the civilian dorm in the
last couple of years? Well, I frankly liked both of
them. Charles, really, I liked the military
because I enjoyed the marching, and, well, I
didn't even mind the drill once a week that we had.
In fact, I kind of enjoyed it. But it was a matter of
you can't stay clean and dressed up in a uniform and
work every spare hour you have. You've got to go
change, and I just couldn't do it. And I would say
that the military was the greatest pleasure I had.
Living in the dorm as a military student was
probably more just real enjoyment because you had
a little closer association with your fellow
classmates in the company that you were in. than
you did as civilian or non-military, because over
in the civilian or non-military group, everybody
was going their own way, and you really didn't have
the close friends there that you did when you were
in military. But I'd say this, I enjoyed both of
them thoroughly. If you worked such a job as
cleaning out the stables, did you have to wear your
uniform even while you were doing that? No, no. If
you were going somewhere and you met an Army
officer or an officer of the day and he says,
so-and-so, where are you going? You tell him where
you're going, he wouldn't give you a non-reg slip.
But if you wandered around too much and didn't have
a specific destination, you could be given, as I
recall, a non-reg demerit. So you could wear
something other than your uniform. Right, when I
was working, right. In fact, I think a lot of them
used the excuse, and if I'm not mistaken, I have,
when really I wasn't going to work. I was going
somewhere, but I didn't have
a uniform on. So the life then in the non-military
dorm was a good bit different.
more segregated individually. Right. Because,
see, we didn't have call to quarters like you do in
the military dorm. At 7.30 of the night, the bell
rung or somebody blew a whistle, and you got to your
room and you stayed there. You got out, you got
permission to get out. Over there in the
non-military, you do pretty well as you want to the
whole time, and nobody was particularly
concerned to see that you stayed in your room. Now,
the last year that I was housemama, We did have some
requirements on staying in your room because that
was part of my job is to check up on the boys and see
that everybody was in by certain times. Would you
say there was more or less harsh play in the
non-military dorm than in the military?
I would say there's a little less. Things as
drowning out or things like that. You had a little
of horseplay over in the non-military, but I don't
believe quite as systematic or as well organized
as you did in the military. Because the military,
there's an incentive to do things in an orderly
manner, and if you got in the habit of drowning
somebody out pretty regularly, you just kept
right at it.
Thank you.